---
layout: post
title: God vs. God
---

In the beginning, God created the light and darkness, the heavens and the earth, and plants and animals. He then proceeded to create evil, and, satisfied with his work, declared everything in his creation to be good. He created man and from him woman and placed them in a garden. In this garden, he caused a tree to grow whose fruit would empower man to know good and evil. The serpent, the embodiment of that which is evil, did not creep in undetected, for God knew everything. Now God didn't warn these humans, still innocent and very credulous, about this serpent's intentions.

**God vs. God - The events occuring during the temptation of Adam and Eve**

**Holy Spirit:** *It would be nice to warn them about the serpent. It's the least I could do, and I mean the very least I'd feel morally required to do.*  
**God:** *But if you do that, what would happen to your plan?*  
**Holy Spirit:** *That's right, we'll just stick to the plan.*  
**Jesus:** *Whose idea was this anyway?*  
**God:** *It was the Holy Spirit's idea.*  
**Holy Spirit:** *And a good one, I might add. I mean, how else could we get man to acknowledge us without directly forcing them to do so? If we intervene, they'll be robots worshiping us because we're the only thing for them to worship.*  
**Jesus:** *Why would they worship us the other way, again? It just doesn't make sense. We'll let the serpent trick them, then they'll need forgiveness, but why would we be mad at them for being tricked by the serpent that we sent to trick them? And when we forgive them, why would they worship us?*  
**God:** *Without worshiping us, they will be doomed to hell. When we forgive them, we'll remind them of the great price we spent to rescue them from our wrath.*  
**Jesus:** *Ok, now that still doesn't make any sense. We forgive them for being tricked by, for all intents and purposes, us, and they're supposed to bow down and serve us. That just doesn't seem fair. I'm not on board with this whole "hell" thing.*  
**Holy Spirit:** *We'll just draw them to us without giving them any really strong direction toward us. At least that way we won't be imposing our will on them. It'd be a freewill thing if they come to us and we'd still get around the claim that we don't care for humanity.*  
**Jesus:** *But what about people being afraid of hell? Will some of them worship us just out of fear that we'll send them to hell if they don't?*  
**God:** *Of course there will be some, perhaps many, who are initially scared by the idea of an eternal punishment. That fear, though, will have a redemptive value of leading them to our forgiveness.*  
**Jesus:** *Why can't we just forgive them? Isn't that what we want them to do to each other?*  
**Holy Spirit:** *If we forgive them without them knowing that we have done so, they will not know to thank us. It's better for them if they know where the forgiveness originated. It just feels better to feel guilty and then pardoned than to feel innocent; it's nice to feel that relief.*  
**Jesus:** *Does that sound a bit sick to anyone else? That can't be our real reason for creating evil.*  
**God:** *We all agreed that creating evil was the only way to show the world how good we are. Without darkness, how will they know to appreciate the light? Men will search for truth, and we will be there in the silent corner waiting for them. When they seek after us with all of their heart, they will find us. The only way for them to not find us is if the world is filled with darkness and evil.*  
**Jesus:** *Well, that makes sense, but I don't think we should hide. Can't we just kick out the serpent and ask the people for forgiveness for plotting against them?*  
**God:** *Son, are we a man that we should lie or the son of man that we should repent? We have decided to do this and we will not change.*  
**Jesus:** *Well, I'll eventually be called both, but Father, not my will, but your will be done.*  
**God:** *(using his best pseudoignorant hat) Hey, what's going on down there? Out! You should be ashamed of yourselves. After all I've done for you, this is how you repay me?*
