---
layout: post
title: Pray for X
date: 2018-04-18 21:05:00 -0600
---

"A being with a plan and the power to accomplish that plan has no need to be asked to 
do what it will already do — it just does it." --Nike


I've got to confess my hatred for prayer. This sort of hatred, though, isn't because 
I'm an atheist with antitheistic leanings. I hated prayer when I was a Christian for 
the simple reason that it felt pointless. Biblically, God knows what we need, knows 
how to give good gifts to his children, and knows the desires of our hearts. You're 
more important than sparrows and the lilies of the field, so rest in the confidence 
that God has your needs in mind. Praying felt like a way to say to God, "Hey, you 
know that plan you've devised? I think it sucks ass." Jesus made prayer a simple 
"Your kingdom come, your will be done..." that seemed to be more about bending our 
will to the will of God than asking him to bow to ours.


Now, I know what you're thinking — "Hey, Adam, Jesus said to ask and God would give 
good things to his children. This proves that prayer is how we get things from God." 
Let's think about that for a bit. Good things aren't what we call necessities. The 
scripture says that even evil humans know how to give good gifts to their children. 
Here, the most we can learn is that God sometimes gives us our hearts' desires when 
we ask Daddy nicely. This guy won't give us shitty gifts when he feels benevolent.


It wasn't me who brought up the comparison to earthly parents — Jesus made me do it.
I'm gonna go one step further beyond wants. "What man among you, having a son who is 
drowning, would be stupid enough to watch him die but would rather administer CPR 
even if the child doesn't ask you? Or a toddler playing with a loaded gun wouldn't 
rush to take the gun immediately instead of waiting for her to ask you to remove the 
bullet from her abdomen? If you, then, being evil know how to take care of your own 
damn kids by fully understanding that needs must always be met and only a sick fuck 
would have a plan that incorporates unmet needs, you're clearly better than the god of 
the universe." --Adam 7:8-10


So why pray? If prayer does anything, it seems to bend people toward accepting nothing
as a possible outcome — I can get behind that because that's how the world actually works. 
What I'd rather hear instead of "Pray for X" is "Pray to be able to accept reality." As 
an atheist, I have to accept that the world is full of pain and people who are trying 
to alleviate that pain in themselves and others. I know that some situations improve and 
others worsen. People who pray attribute improvements in reality as answers to prayer and 
find comfort using it through hard times. Prayer, meditation, journaling, etc. give us a 
chance to cope with adversity. We've got to admit, though, that prayer is as effective as 
doing nothing on the actual outcome. After all, God will do what he will do.


--Adam
