---
layout: post
title: Deconversion
date: 2020-08-26 15:45:00 -0600
---

# Faithlessness: A Personal Account of Doubt

"[F]aith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen...But without faith it is impossible to please him: for he that comes to God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him."
--Hebrews 11:1,6

"Faith is believing what you know ain't so."
--Mark Twain

If the writer of Hebrews is correct, that faith is the substance whereby we please God, one December morning in 2007 left me irrevocably displeasing and damned for no longer finding the ability to believe such a crucial message. The glacial progress of my faith's death sneaked up on me, occurring well beneath my conscious until the primordia of doubt matured into undeniable disbelief. I will attempt to outline this process in words which shall fail me as I discuss the internal states, questions, and cross-examinations of my own conclusions  which lead to my atheism.

I started life within the church, learning from adults those attributes of the Christian god which would shape my faith in my early adulthood. God, I learned, was patient and kind, but jealous and ready to exact his vengeance on all who failed to find him worthy of wholehearted praise. Heaven and Hell were simply the fruits of the afterlife our earthly deeds and belief bore. If we found it unfair, we need only read scripture to find that God has given each a measure of faith and made himself manifest to the world. Paul stated, "For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness; Because that which may be known of God is manifest in them; for God hath shewed it unto them. For the invisible things of him from the creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead; so that they are without excuse" (Romans 1:18-20). I learned that God would never force anyone to believe in him because he was a gentleman. The church also taught me that knowing God's existence through a glass dimly gave me free will, something angels did not have, and allowed me to worship God in truth; knowing him without obfuscation would cause me to fall down and worship him without choice. I learned that scientists were attempting to answer the question of creation with mathematics and physics and blind guesses guided by demons to prevent humans from trusting God. I knew that God was there from the foundations of the Earth and that only truths I needed to know would be revealed through him, not the hypotheses of people in universities and labs.

### Regarding the rewarder of those who diligently seek

I set about to find him, find his voice, find his answers through faith. I studied scripture, listened to sermons, prayed, worshiped, and believed that anything which did not make sense in reality was the product of my humanity. "For what if some did not believe? shall their unbelief make the faith of God without effect? God forbid: yea, let God be true, but every man a liar; as it is written, That you might be justified in your sayings, and might overcome when you are judged" (Romans 3:3-4). I cannot trust my eyes to see infrared or ultraviolet; in much the same way, I believed my mind could not see the supernatural. "Lord, I believe," a father of a son in dire need of healing once said, "help my unbelief." I prayed the same prayer for nine years. In early 2004, nearly five years after confessing my sins and professing my faith in Jesus, I wrote, "Where is my Damascas Road? / My time to find you / A desert place where you speak? / Blinding me beside you, / Teaching".  God being the one with the plan did not have to respond. Jesus told Doubting Thomas that those who have not seen and believe are blessed; I was blessed in the mind of the only one who mattered even if I didn't like how it felt. Almost four years later, I found myself in my living room talking to God one last time. I told him I didn't believe in him, told him I was aware that I may be wrong for no longer feeling convinced by the evidence Paul said was manifest in me. I saw trees and birds, water and fish, blood-borne diseases and human inventions. None of it spoke clearly to me that the only possible god is YHWH, and none of it told me I needed to repent for my humanity. The Cross of Christ did not manifest itself in the buzzing of bees, and the fires of Hell did not reveal themselves in the bites of ants. I saw nature, human frailty, and a material realm with an unknowable cause. I asked for forgiveness for the disbelief that kept reappearing and told him that if I see him face-to-face one day, I'd believe he existed. I told him that I'd go about my life as a de-facto atheist, not the sort who believed there were no gods, just one who was not convinced any longer.

### Belief is not subject to our will

"IF HE HAS SPOKEN, WHY IS THE UNIVERSE NOT CONVINCED? If the knowledge of a God is the most necessary, why is it not the most evident and the clearest?"
--Percy Bysshe Shelley

The father asking Jesus for the miraculous healing of his son knew he had no power over his mind. He tried to believe, said he believed, and acknowledged that, no matter how much power his own profession had over his will, it would never be enough to silence the doubt. Doubt is the product of a mind that finds at least one alternative to any conclusion. He could envision a world in which his son succumbed to his illness and it scared him. For my mind, the possible existence of other gods, of non-god superbeings, of ephemeral vapors, and of a material-only universe crept into my focus. I didn't even put them there; God did it when Moses issued the first commandment. "You shall worship no other god." I get it, God may be the only one, but he said he was jealous in the same way a spouse may say they are jealous. "Don't go loving anyone else" is completely different from "All those other humans are just cardboard and wax". The church I grew up in told me they were all fake, but the scripture only says idols are fake. Idols, not gods, were quickly discounted, but when the psalmist says "There is none like you among the gods, O Lord" (Psalm 86:8), God appears to be the best among many.

If other gods could exist, how do we know for sure that YHWH is THE god? The bible has an answer for that: "The god that answers by fire, let him be God" (1 Kings 18:24). Other scriptures suggest that we should not test God, but here we are told that we can call on God, or at least Elijah could, to prove that YHWH was the better god to follow--if a fire were needed. Perhaps if Elijah proposed a different task, say "The god that answers by spaghetti," Baal may have resulted in being Israel's victor and Elijah would be dead instead of 450 of Baal's prophets. God could have sent fire to a wet altar and licked up all the water, but is that the only explanation? Could Elijah have had some primitive lighter fluid  and a flint? Being almost three thousand years ago, it is well within the realm of possibility that Elijah discovered something that no one else would suspect. Magic and science and miracle were synonyms at the time. On the other hand, it is possible that none of it happened. The Buddha is said to have emerged from his mother's side five hundred years later on April 8. I do not feel compelled to believe either magical story. That some do is no proof of their truth.

If someone stood before me, doused logs with water, and prayed for them to be engulfed in flame, my modern mind would ask what the trick was if it worked. I would never assume it was a miracle or supported any claim they made prior to it working. Besides, answering by fire is neat, but an omnipotent god could do better. Raising someone from the dead is another miracle I'm supposed to believe is amazing, yet examples of people being confirmed dead only to awaken on the slab at the morgue are not unheard of. Two millenia ago, Jesus is reported to have raised three people from the dead. This was at a time when heartbeats and brain waves and CPR were not yet in our collective comprehension. Sure, Jesus could have truly raised three people from the dead, but those people could also not have been dead. We are not told of the number of people who approached Jesus with their dead family members only to be turned away or given some reason for why it worked for Lazaurs but not their loved one. If only the preparation for burial in ancient Israel had been cremation instead of wrapping in linens, it would have been even more amazing. I am compelled to believe neither the resurrection of the recently dead in bodily form nor from a container of ashes on the mantle--miracles are things which can just as easily be described as fable or confusion. In fact, I cannot, do not, and am convinced that I will never again believe such things.

### Disbelief does not mean I'm right

So I don't believe, but I could be wrong. There could be a creative god with the power to torture those who it deems worthy of everlasting doom who sent a version of itself through the vessel of a twelve-year-old virgin in order to offer forgiveness to anyone who would believe that it killed itself in sacrifice to itself. The absurdity of the Cross, "unto the Jews a stumblingblock, and unto the Greeks foolishness," is not proof that it is wrong. A god could make up any rule it wants to save or doom humanity for any reason. It could be as incomprehensible, incoherent, and inconsistent as it wants. But so could all other gods. The ancient gods of forgotten peoples may be crawling around in a desert thirsty for adoration and longing for believers to return them to their former glory the way Tinkerbell needed an audience to shout "I do believe in fairies! I do believe in fairies! I do, I do, I do believe in fairies!" If my time believing in the supernatural has taught me anything, it is that all things no matter how absurd are possible if natural limits no longer apply. As such, Hell could be waiting for me in any number of religions.

### Is there any way of truly knowing where we came from?

Did a god create everything? I used to need to know. The question burned in my heart. Surely nature couldn't have given rise to itself, I thought. Nature teaches me that each effect has a cause, that all things which exist have a predicate. It was this nature, what Paul suggested would reveal everything I needed to know about God, that led me to wonder what caused God. If all things need to be created, why not God? If God could exist without being, could nature? I couldn't even turn to the scientific method for answers. While science can suggest the cause of the Big Bang, it can never be certain or conclude that there weren't billions of similar, successive bangs in the past separated by billions of years filled with nothing between each of them. And again, the same could be true with gods. One may exist now who is without cause, but it is equally possible that the gods themselves have causes and gaps between the creation of each new god. Perhaps one god per bang?

Theologians and scientists can have their speculation. I don't need to know the answers anymore if the answers aren't clear and universal. We don't have such debates about air or water or sunshine. I'll stick to what I know for sure. My curiosity remains, but I don't know why I would need to know anything like this for sure. The universe or multiverse or whatever we call the natural realm exists. Some read ancient texts about the way it all came to be and believe them to be true. Is our culture's version of the creation myth more valid because of how prevalent it is in our community as compared to those myths of more distant cultures? Is there anything intrinsically right about "Let there be light" and something clearly wrong with the Jain belief that soul, matter, space, and time have always existed and are only subject to natural laws? It is possible that we are all wrong and possible that we will never know the truth of it, even after death. We may discover that the long-awaited afterlife will be as dim as our pre-life.

### On the afterlife

Death holds the final sting. Die the wrong way, in the wrong spiritual condition, and an eternity of torment may be waiting. We are told that faith is the medicine for this affliction. Faith in a loving god? Isn't that the same god who will be condemning us to eternal damnation? I understand the temporal punishments earthly parents give to their children, but locking children in gasoline-drenched rooms and igniting the fumes has no redemptive value or even an ounce of justification. We read about such parents in the paper (in 2012, I read about the parent of a former student) and hope they go to jail forever, at a minimum. When I was young, I wondered what death would be like, probably fueled by sermons I had heard of people claiming to have been to Heaven and shown the anguish of those in Hell. I imagined the wonders of heaven, the fires of hell, and even the nihilistic non-existence I'd heard some people believe. I had been around people who came from different cultures and religious opinions and could not accept that they would be tortured forever for believing the wrong thing while I received the reward of being born into a Christian home. Still, if God gets to make the rules, he could demand anything and we'd be subject to his will. I didn't understand nihililsm until 2007 when I couldn't believe in God anymore. I imagined my mental and physical state before being born and matched it with what I imagined happened to slugs after we kill them. I saw nothing. Empty unawareness. I did not experience any anguish during the proposed 13.8 billion years since the Big Bang of my non-existence. Perhaps death is the same. Instead of making this life seem meaningless, it made me feel like the little piece of awareness I get is much more valuable than if I had the rest of eternity to appreciate it.

### Summary, and a bit of Devil's Advocacy

It is reasonable to believe in a god, even a god like the Christian god because any god can make any rule and seem as crazy as it wants in order to win only the lucky few as the Christian god is wont to do.* I can't because I saw too many other viable conditions where my own god was not the definite, only answer to all things. The glue of faith that held me to the Christian god in the face of those other possibilities gave out as I analyzed my own beliefs and found that I was not fully convinced. I may discover that an angry, just god who sacrificed himself on a cross for me to put it to an open shame in 2007 waits for me on the other side of death, poised to toss me into the Lake of Fire. I may plead for mercy only to discover that God is immovable since I failed to make and keep the proper profession during my blink-of-an-eye life. Of course, I may also discover that the nebulous ooze is pleased I didn't succumb to the ploys of the uberlords as they tried to ensnare me with their many anthropomorphic deities. Somehow, I feel most comfortable in the camp of agnostic atheism. Here, I don't claim to hold any divine revelations and I don't need any version of past events to justify my current position. I do not know anything about origins, I don't need the scientists to be right or the preachers to be wrong. Gods can exist or not exist and I'll keep feeling as confused about it all until my death. In early 2008, I wrote, "I am the sincerely unconvinced," and soon donned the label "atheist" ("A-" = "without", "theism" = "the belief that god(s) exist"), not for any affirmative belief that gods did not exist, but because I didn't have any belief in them. Nothing in the very nature Paul said I can look to compels me to change that position. No amount of evidence I have seen has erased the doubt and uncertainty that surrounds the supernatural realm in my mind. Starting with nature, I never arrived at belief in any specific god or concluded that I was born a sinner in need of redemption. I never found reason to fall to my knees and beg for forgiveness after observing stars or holding precious rocks. Watching the death of countless animals, I never concluded that I had a soul or would spend an eternity anywhere after my body decays. Religion teaches all of that, not nature. What I found in nature was raw beauty and savagery, ordered chaos, and wild potential. I found reason to fear and hope, cause for anger and wonder, and a need to struggle and a chance to enjoy the fruits of that struggle. I found easy lives scattered among the various faiths and non-faiths upon the earth, and I found unimaginable torment there, too. The gods could want it this way, but it could be that a material world such as our own were just as likely governed by chance and the desires of the humans who inhabit it. In 2007, I gave up the gymnastics and embraced my disbelief. In the thirteen years that have followed, I have continued to reexamine my position and fail to find the manifestation of anything close to conclusive proof of any god, let alone a god with specific attributes. I remain as much an atheist as I was then--open to the likely probability that there are gods among us but unable to synthesize true faith for any of them.

*Note: I do not refute the possibility of a god such as the Christian god even though I see many issues with the statements of faith as presented in scripture. This essay does not endeavor to address them because a supernatural being does not need to behave reasonably or in a way that makes sense to humanity. Apologists spend their days answering such questions and will always find ways to defend any and all seemingly incoherent scriptures against every attack from nonbelievers without fail. The erosion of my faith did not depend on any of these specific points of contention; they were merely guideposts along the journey into mature doubt.
